Feat: MTLS Auth plugin (#950)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/_kong_plugins/mtls-auth/index.md

  - certificates
---

The MTLS Auth plugin lets you add mutual TLS authentication based on a client-supplied or a server-supplied certificate, 
and on the configured trusted certificate authority (CA) list.

## How does the mTLS plugin work?

The mTLS plugin automatically maps certificates to consumers based on the common name field.
To authenticate a consumer with mTLS, it must provide a valid certificate and
complete a mutual TLS handshake with {{site.base_gateway}}.

The plugin validates the certificate provided against the configured CA list based on the
requested Route or Service:

> * If the certificate is untrusted or expired, the response is `HTTP 401 TLS certificate failed verification`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If the certificate is not trusted, or expired, the response is `HTTP 401 TLS certificate failed verification`.
```

  - certificates
---

This plugin lets you add mutual TLS authentication based on a client-supplied or a server-supplied certificate, 
and on the configured trusted certificate authority (CA) list.

> The mTLS plugin automatically maps certificates to consumers based on the common name field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## How does the mTLS plugin work?

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The mTLS plugin automatically maps certificates to consumers based on the common name field.
```

To authenticate a consumer with mTLS, it must provide a valid certificate and
complete a mutual TLS handshake with {{site.base_gateway}}.

The plugin validates the certificate provided against the configured CA list based on the

> requested route or service:
> * If the certificate is not trusted or has expired, the response is
>   `HTTP 401 TLS certificate failed verification`.
> * If consumer did not present a valid certificate (this includes requests not
>   sent to the HTTPS port), then the response is `HTTP 401 No required TLS certificate was sent`.
>   The exception is if the `config.anonymous` option is configured on the plugin, in which
>   case the anonymous consumer is used and the request is allowed to proceed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requested Route or Service:
* If the certificate is untrusted or expired, the response is `HTTP 401 TLS certificate failed verification`.
* If no valid certificate is provided (including HTTP requests), the response is `HTTP 401 No required TLS certificate was sent`.  
  However, if `config.anonymous` is set, the request is allowed using the anonymous consumer.
```

### Client certificate request

> Client certificates are requested in the `ssl_certificate_by_lua` phase where {{site.base_gateway}} does not
> have access to `route` and `workspace` information. Due to this information gap, {{site.base_gateway}} asks for
> the client certificate by default on every handshake if the `mtls-auth` plugin is configured on any route or service.
> In most cases, the failure of the client to present a client certificate is not going to affect subsequent
> proxying if that route or service does not have the `mtls-auth` plugin applied. The exception is where
> the client is a desktop browser, which prompts the end user to choose the client cert to send and
> lead to user experience issues rather than proxy behavior problems. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Client certificates are requested during the `ssl_certificate_by_lua` phase, where {{site.base_gateway}} doesn't have access to Route or Workspace information. 
Because of this, {{site.base_gateway}} requests a client certificate during every TLS handshake if the `mtls-auth` plugin is configured on any Route or Service.

In most cases, if a client doesn't present a certificate, it won't affect proxying—unless the specific Route or Service requires `mtls-auth`.
The main exception is desktop browsers, which may prompt users to select a certificate, potentially causing a confusing user experience even when the certificate isn't needed.
```

> To improve this situation, {{site.base_gateway}} builds an in-memory map of SNIs from the configured {{site.base_gateway}} routes that should present a client certificate. 
> To limit client certificate requests during handshake while ensuring the client
> certificate is requested when needed, the in-memory map is dependent on the routes in
> {{site.base_gateway}} having the SNIs attribute set.
> If any routes don't have SNIs set, {{site.base_gateway}} must request
> the client certificate during every TLS handshake:
> 
> - **Plugin is applied globally**: mTLS auth is applied on every request irrespective of workspace
> - **Plugin is applied at the service level**: If one or more of the routes *do not* have SNIs set, mTLS auth is applied on every request irrespective of workspace. 
> - **Plugin is applied at the route level**: If one or more of the routes *do not* have SNIs set, applied on every request irrespective of workspace.
> - **Plugin is applied at the route level and all routes have SNIs set**: mTLS is applied on specific requests only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To optimize TLS handshakes, {{site.base_gateway}} builds an in-memory map of SNIs from Routes that require client certificates. 
This helps limit unnecessary certificate requests while ensuring mTLS is enforced when needed. 
The map relies on Routes having the `SNIs` attribute set. 
If any Route lacks an SNI, {{site.base_gateway}} must request a client certificate during every TLS handshake.

Certificate request behavior based on plugin scope:

* **Plugin applied globally**: mTLS is enforced on every request across all Workspaces.
* **Plugin applied at the Service level**: If any associated Route lacks an SNI, mTLS is enforced on every request.
* **Plugin applied at the Route level**:
  * If any Route lacks an SNI, mTLS is enforced on every request.
  * If all Routes have SNIs, mTLS is enforced only for matching SNI requests.

```

> SNIs must be set for all routes that mutual TLS authentication uses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SNIs must be set for all Routes that mutual TLS authentication uses.
```

### Sending the CA DNs during TLS handshake

> By default, {{site.base_gateway}} doesn't send the CA DN list during the TLS handshake. 
> More specifically, the `certificate_authorities` field in the CertificateRequest message is empty.
> 
> In some cases, the client may need this `certificate_authorities` to guide
> certificate selection. Setting `config.send_ca_dn` to `true` adds the
> CA certificates configured in the `config.ca_certificate` to the lists of
> the corresponding SNIs.
> 
> As mentioned in [Client certificate request](#client-certificate-request),
> due to the phase gap, {{site.base_gateway}} doesn't know the route information in the
> `ssl_certificate_by_lua` phase, which is decided in the later `access` phase.
> Therefore {{site.base_gateway}} builds an in-memory map of SNIs. 
> The CA DN list will eventually be associated with the SNIs. 
> If multiple `mtls-auth` plugins with different `config.ca_certificate` are 
> associated to the same SNI, their CA DNs are merged. 
> For example:
> 
> - When the plugin is enabled in the **global** workspace scope, the CA DNs
>   are associated with a special SNI, `\*`.
> - When the plugin is applied at the **service** level, the CA DNs are
>   associated with every SNI of every route to this service. 
>   If a route has no SNIs set, then the CA DNs are associated with a special SNI, `\*`.
> - When the plugin is applied at the **route** level, the CA DNs are
>   associated with every SNI configured on this route. 
>   If the route has no SNIs set, then the CA DNs are associated with a special SNI, `\*`.
> 
> During the mTLS handshake, if the client sends a SNI in the ClientHello message and
> the SNI is found in the in-memory map of SNIs, then the corresponding CA DN list is sent in CertificateRequest message.
> 
> If the client doesn't send SNIs in the ClientHello message or the SNI sent is
> unknown to {{site.base_gateway}}, then the CA DN list associated with `\*` is sent only when the client certificate is requested.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, {{site.base_gateway}} does not send the CA Distinguished Name (CA DN) list during the TLS handshake. Specifically, the `certificate_authorities` field in the `CertificateRequest` message is empty.

Some clients use the CA DN list to help select the correct certificate. To support this, set `config.send_ca_dn` to `true`. 
This adds the CA certificates defined in `config.ca_certificate` to the appropriate SNI entries.

As noted in [Client certificate request](#client-certificate-request), {{site.base_gateway}} does not have access to Route information during the `ssl_certificate_by_lua` phase. 
Instead, it builds an in-memory map of SNIs. 
The CA DN list is linked to these SNIs, and if multiple `mtls-auth` plugins with different `config.ca_certificate` values are applied to the same SNI, their CA DNs are merged.

CA DN list association depends on plugin scope:

* Global scope: CA DNs are linked to a special SNI `*`.
* Service level:
  * CA DNs are associated with each SNI of the Service's Routes.
  * If a Route has no SNI, CA DNs are linked to `*`.
* Route level:
  * CA DNs are associated with each SNI on the Route.
  * If no SNI is configured, CA DNs are linked to `*`.

During the mTLS handshake:

- If the client includes a known SNI in the `ClientHello`, the corresponding CA DN list is sent in the `CertificateRequest`.
- If the client does not send an SNI or sends an unknown one, {{site.base_gateway}} only sends the CA DN list associated with `*`—and only if a client certificate is being requested.

```

### Troubleshooting

> When authentication fails, the client does not have access to any details that explain the
> failure. The security reason for this omission is to prevent malicious reconnaissance.
> Instead, the details are recorded inside Kong's error logs under the `[mtls-auth]`
> filter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When authentication fails, the client does not receive any details about the failure. This is intentional for security reasons—to prevent information leaks that could aid malicious users.

Failure details are logged internally in {{site.base_gateway}} error logs under the `[mtls-auth]` filter.

```
